While most trademarks take the familiar form of words, logos, or symbols, U.S. law recognizes a broader category of source identifiers that depart from these conventions. Known as nontraditional trademarks, these include features such as color, sound, scent, motion, texture, and product shape. Although nontraditional marks are relatively rare in practice, their existence raises important questions about the scope of trademark protection, the boundaries of distinctiveness, and the risk of granting exclusive rights in functional or aesthetic features. Recognized under the Lanham Act, nontraditional trademarks expand on the theoretical limits of what may be registered. They also face heightened scrutiny from the U.S. Patent and Trademark office, and the courts. This article explores the legal framework governing nontraditional marks, the most common types of such marks, and the evidentiary and procedural challenges that accompany the registration of such marks through examination of seminal cases. 


The Lanham Act defines a trademark as any word, name, symbol, or device, or any combination thereof, used to identify and distinguish the source of goods and services (15 U.S.C. 1127). The Supreme Court has held that this broad definition also applies to the recognition of nontraditional trademarks. In Qualitex Co. v. Jacobson Products Co., 514 U.S. 159 (1995), the Court held that the color green-gold1 could serve as a trademark if it had acquired distinctiveness and was non-functional. In this case, the green-gold shade applied to press pads used in dry-cleaning was found to be source-identifying and non-functional. This opened the door for future nontraditional mark registrations.


Three core legal requirements govern the ability to register nontraditional trademarks in the U.S.: distinctiveness, non-functionality, and use in commerce. The first, distinctiveness, is crucial to trademark law. A mark can be distinctive in two ways. It may be inherently distinctive, meaning its very nature signals source to the consumer without further explanation. Fanciful and arbitrary marks fall into this category. Coined words like “Kodak” evoke no other meaning in a consumer’s mind than the brand itself. Alternatively, a mark may acquire distinctiveness, also known as secondary meaning, when consumers connect it with a single source over time. Section 2(f) of the Lanham Act provides the statutory requirements for proving acquired distinctiveness, which typically is through evidence of substantial continuous and exclusive use. In appeals, consumer surveys are also sometimes called upon as evidence of acquired distinctiveness.  


For nontraditional trademarks, inherent distinctiveness is not possible. Features like product design, color, scent, or texture are not viewed by consumers as automatically identifying source. Instead, these are often decorative or functional elements of the product itself. The Supreme Court’s decision in Wal-mart Stores, Inc. v Samara Bros, Inc., 529 U.S. 205 (2000) deals with this very issue, holding that product design can never be inherently distinctive. In that case, Samara sought protection for the trade dress of their line of children’s clothing by claiming that the designs on the clothing were a distinctive identifier of source. The Court held that product design cannot be inherently distinctive, since consumers see the design features as decorative, and not a sign of source.  


Second, a nontraditional mark must be non-functional. This principle is based in the idea that trademark law should not grant monopoly over useful product features, which is more appropriately the domain of patent law. Under 15 U.S.C. 1052(e)(5), the USPTO must refuse registration of any mark for which the core feature includes the use or purpose of the product or affects cost or quality. The Supreme Court made this principle explicit in TrafFix Devices, Inc., v. Marketing Displays, Inc., 532 U.S. 23 (2001), holding that features used to hold up road signs were functional and therefore ineligible for protection. For comparison, a counter example is the Coca Cola bottle shape. The shape was found to be protectable under trademark law because it was distinctive and non-functional. It did not improve the function of the bottle, its manufacturing cost, or structural integrity. It was purely ornamental and memorable, providing a source identifier for consumers without affecting the practicality of the bottle, and this distinction proved decisive in the decision to grant trademark protection. 


Third, and this applies to all trademarks as noted in 15 U.S.C. 1127, is use in commerce. Use in commerce is the bona fide use of the mark in the course of ordinary trade. For nontraditional marks, this can be a difficult hurdle.2 Nontraditional trademarks rely on specimens which show that the unique feature itself signals the source of origin. In other words, how does a nontraditional mark demonstrate that consumers perceive color, sound, scent, or some other feature as as a trademark, rather than decoration, or simple product design?  
	

For color marks, caution must be taken to ensure that the color is not associated with common signaling used in the industry. For example, red or orange can signal a warning, or green might signal safety or health. Instead, specimens might want to show the color used consistently in advertising and product packaging, and make effort to teach consumers to associate that color with the brand. Famously, Tiffany has a robin-egg blue, which it regularly reinforces in consumer’s minds through packaging and advertising to emphasize the color as part of its brand identity.
	

Sound may be more straight forward, as sounds can be more inherently distinctive. Consumers have great memory for sound, as evidenced by every time you can identify a song by the first note or two. It shouldn’t be a surprise that the “Dun-dun” noise that plays at the beginning of every episode Law and Order is trademarked, and as you read that phrase, the noise likely played in your head. Perhaps even more recognizable is the Netflix sound that welcomes a viewer upon starting the app.3 However, you must provide musical notation and an audio sample to get by the USPTO for registration. Classic examples include the NBC Chimes and the Intel ‘Bong’. 
	

Scent is difficult to register. An applicant must provide a written description of the scent, and evidence that it is not functional and serves as a source identifier. As such, scent registrations are exceedingly rare. The first scent mark was for a plumeria scented thread. The applicant had to show that consumers associated the scented thread with the product in that it identified the source of the goods, and that it was not just a pleasant feature.4 Nor was it a function of the thread. Contrast this with a perfume, in which the scent is the core function and therefor not registerable. 
	

Motion marks present other difficulties with registration. A motion mark must depict the motion in action or in freeze-frame segments, and act as a source identifier. Pixar’s lamp smashing down on the ‘I’ of its name at the introduction of its movies may be a well known example of a motion mark.5 Lamborghini’s doors were also a registered motion mark6, and demonstrate how solidifying an association in consumers’ minds between the motion and the brand is key to securing a pathway for registration with a nontraditional mark. 
  

Though it is important to understand the process by which nontraditional marks can be registered, it is equally important to understand the policy considerations behind nontraditional trademarks. Trademark law must straddle a fine line between protecting business interests in maintaining their intellectual property, while also being cognizant of the real possibility of creating an unfair marketplace by allowing companies to register trademarks too easily and risking monopolization. The functionality doctrine and distinctiveness help mitigate this possibility, by ensuring that only features which truly serve as source-identifiers and not a functional or aesthetic feature, are afforded legal protection. 


For legal professionals, pursuing and protecting a nontraditional mark requires care and a good understanding of the requirements laid out in the TMEP. Specimens must be chosen precisely in order to best showcase how the mark has acquired distinctiveness and demonstrates a strong association with the brand in consumer’s minds. Be prepared for an uphill battle. Precedent shows that these registrations are difficult, and a well prepared response to an Office Action will likely be required. IT may be prudent to examine whether the client is prepared to go through the arduous process of acquiring such a difficult mark. 